# Validating Your Code {#19-validatingyour-code}

> You can never guarantee your code is correct. 
>
> You can only prove it's wrong.

Let's pause our learning of language features and look at some programming fundamentals. Specifically, the problem of making sure your code works properly.

## Testing {#19-testing}

> If it's not tested, it's broken.

Because Java is a (mostly [^1] ) statically-typed language, programmers often become too comfortable with the apparent safety of the language, thinking "if the compiler accepts it, it's OK." But static type checking is a very limited form of testing. It only means the compiler accepts the syntax and basic type rules of your code. It doesn't mean the code satisfies the goals of your program. As you gain more programming experience, you'll come to understand that your code almost never satisfies those goals. The first step towards code validation is creating tests that check the code behavior against your goals.

### Unit Testing {#19-unit-testing}

This is the process of building integrated tests into all code you create, and running those tests every time you build your system. That way, the build process checks for more than just syntax errors. You teach it to check for semantic errors as well.

"Unit" refers to the idea of testing small pieces of your code. Typically, each class has tests checking the behavior of all its methods. "System" testing is different, and checks that the finished program satisfies its requirements.

C-style programming languages, and C++ in particular, traditionally valued performance over programming safety. The reason that developing programs in Java is so much faster than in C++ (roughly twice as fast, by most accounts) is because of Java's safety net: features like garbage collection and improved type checking. By integrating unit testing into your build process, you extend this safety net, resulting in faster development. You can also more easily and boldly refactor your code when you discover design or implementation flaws, and in general produce a better product, more quickly.

My own experience with testing began when I realized that, to guarantee the correctness of code in a book, every program in that book must be automatically extracted, then compiled using an appropriate build system. The build system used in this book is [Gradle](https://gradle.org/), and after you install the JDK, you can just type `gradlew compileJava` to compile all the code for the book. The effect of automatic extraction and compilation on the code quality of the book was so immediate and dramatic it soon became (in my mind) a requisite for any programming book---how can you trust code you didn't compile? I also discovered that I can make sweeping changes using search-and-replace throughout the book. I know that if I introduce a flaw, the code extractor and the build system flushes it out.

As programs became more complex, I found a serious hole in my system. Compiling programs is clearly an important first step, and for a published book it seems a fairly revolutionary one (because of publishing pressures, you can often open a programming book and discover a coding flaw). However, I received messages from readers reporting semantic problems in my code. Of course, these problems could be discovered only by running the code. I took some early faltering steps toward implementing a system to perform automatic execution tests, but succumbed to publishing schedules, all the while knowing there was definitely something wrong with my process that would come back to bite me in the form of embarrassing bug reports.

I had also gotten regular complaints that I didn't show enough program output. I needed to validate the output of a program while showing the validated output in the book. My previous attitude was that the reader should be running the programs while reading the book, and many readers did just that and benefited from it. A hidden reason for that attitude, however, was I didn't have a way to prove the output shown in the book was correct. From experience, I knew that over time, something would happen so the output was no longer correct (or, I wouldn't get it right in the first place). To solve this problem, I created a tool in the Python language (you will find this tool in the downloaded examples). Most programs in this book produce console output, and this tool compares that output to the expected output shown in the comment at the end of the source-code listing, so readers can see the expected output, and know this output is verified by the build process.

### JUnit {#19-junit}

The original JUnit, published in 2000, was presumably based on Java 1.0 and thus could not make use of Java's reflection facilities (see [Reflection](#)). As a result, writing unit tests with the old JUnit was a rather busy and wordy activity. I found the design unpleasant, and wrote my own unit testing framework as an example for the [Annotations](#) chapter. This framework went to the other extreme, "trying the simplest thing that could possibly work" (A key phrase from Extreme Programming (XP)). Since then, JUnit has been vastly improved using reflection and annotations, which greatly simplifies the process of writing unit test code. For Java 8, they even added support for lambdas. This book uses JUnit5, the latest version at the time.

In the simplest use of JUnit, you tag each method that represents a test with the `@Test` annotation. JUnit identifies these methods as individual tests and sets up and runs them one at a time, taking measures to avoid side effects between tests.

Let's try a simple example. `CountedList` inherits `ArrayList `, with added information to keep track of how many `CountedList`s are created:

```java
// validating/CountedList.java 
// Keeps track of how many of itself are created. 
package validating; 
import java.util.*;

public class CountedList extends ArrayList<String> { 
  private static int counter = 0; 
  private int id = counter++; 
  public CountedList() { 
    System.out.println("CountedList #" + id); 
  } 
  public int getId() { return id; }
}
```

Standard practice is to put tests in their own subdirectory. Tests must also be in packages so JUnit can discover them:

```java
// validating/tests/CountedListTest.java 
// Simple use of JUnit to test CountedList. 
package validating; 
import java.util.*; 
import org.junit.jupiter.api.*; 
import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;

public class CountedListTest {
  private CountedList list; 
  @BeforeAll 
  static void beforeAllMsg() {
    System.out.println(">>> Starting CountedListTest"); 
  } 
  @AfterAll static void afterAllMsg() {
    System.out.println(">>> Finished CountedListTest"); 
  } 
  @BeforeEach 
  public void initialize() {
    list = new CountedList();
    System.out.println("Set up for " + list.getId());
    for(int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
      list.add(Integer.toString(i));
  } 
  @AfterEach 
  public void cleanup() {
    System.out.println("Cleaning up " + list.getId()); 
  } 
  @Test 
  public void insert() {
    System.out.println("Running testInsert()");
    assertEquals(list.size(), 3);
    list.add(1, "Insert");
    assertEquals(list.size(), 4);
    assertEquals(list.get(1), "Insert");
  } 
  @Test public void replace() { 
    System.out.println("Running testReplace()"); 
    assertEquals(list.size(), 3); 
    list.set(1, "Replace"); 
    assertEquals(list.size(), 3); 
    assertEquals(list.get(1), "Replace");
  } 
  // A helper method to simplify the code. As 
  // long as it's not annotated with @Test, it will
  // not be automatically executed by JUnit. 
  private void compare(List<String> lst, String[] strs) {
    assertArrayEquals(lst.toArray(new String[0]), strs); 
  } 
  @Test public void order() {
    System.out.println("Running testOrder()");
    compare(list, new String[] { "0", "1", "2" }); 
  } 
  @Test public void remove() {
    System.out.println("Running testRemove()");
    assertEquals(list.size(), 3);
    list.remove(1);
    assertEquals(list.size(), 2);
    compare(list, new String[] { "0", "2" });
  } 
  @Test public void addAll() {
  System.out.println("Running testAddAll()"); 
    list.addAll(Arrays.asList(new String[] {
      "An", "African", "Swallow"})); 
    assertEquals(list.size(), 6); 
    compare(list, new String[] { "0", "1", "2",
      "An", "African", "Swallow" });
  }
} 
/* Output:
>>> Starting CountedListTest 
CountedList #0 
Set up for 0 
Running testRemove() 
Cleaning up 0 
CountedList #1 
Set up for 1 
Running testReplace() 
Cleaning up 1 
CountedList #2 
Set up for 2 
Running testAddAll() 
Cleaning up 2 
CountedList #3 
Set up for 3 
Running testInsert() 
Cleaning up 3 
CountedList #4 
Set up for 4 
Running testOrder() 
Cleaning up 4
>>> Finished CountedListTest
```

